OLTP:::::
OLTP or Online Transaction Processing is a type of data processing that consists of executing a number of transactions occurring concurrently—online banking, shopping, order entry, or sending text messages, for example. These transactions traditionally are referred to as economic or financial transactions, recorded and secured so that an enterprise can access the information anytime for accounting or reporting purposes.

In the past, OLTP was limited to real-world interactions in which something was exchanged–money, products, information, request for services, and so on. But the definition of transaction in this context has expanded over the years, especially since the advent of the internet, to encompass any kind of digital interaction or engagement with a business that can be triggered from anywhere in the world and via any web-connected sensor. It also includes any kind of interaction or action such as downloading pdfs on a web page, viewing a specific video, or automatic maintenance triggers or comments on social channels that maybe critical for a business to record to serve their customers better.

OLAP :::
Online analytical processing (OLAP) is software technology you can use to analyze business data from different points of view. Organizations collect and store data from multiple data sources, such as websites, applications, smart meters, and internal systems. OLAP combines and groups this data into categories to provide actionable insights for strategic planning. For example, a retailer stores data about all the products it sells, such as color, size, cost, and location. The retailer also collects customer purchase data, such as the name of the items ordered and total sales value, in a different system. OLAP combines the datasets to answer questions such as which color products are more popular or how product placement impacts sales.

Difference between OLAP and OLTP ?

Online analytical processing (OLAP) and online transaction processing (OLTP) are two different data processing systems designed for different purposes. 
OLAP is optimized for complex data analysis and reporting,
while OLTP is optimized for transactional processing and real-time updates.
